And so the whole understanding of all of veterinary medicine has changed.
The importance of livestock, the food animal type of animal is
that has radically changed.
It isn't the single cow.
Of course, I came from dairy country, and you came down to beef country.
So this is a very different scenario.
And the tendency then, when I came here at first, was, well, you kind of worked on a herd basis, not an individual.
But every rancher still had Bessie, who was his favorite, and he would still do anything for Bessie.
She may not have had a cow in 10 years, but she was still
Someday she'd have that real winner.
The production animal has changed.
The focus on the herd has changed.
We talked about herd health when I went to school, but it truly has become more of a herd health situation.
Even in small animals, you talk to people who have catteries or who raise a lot of puppies, not necessarily a lot, but they want good puppies and they want them going to good homes.
You're talking herd health issues.
The importance of food safety has changed dramatically.
Yes, I didn't want to get sick.
Yes, I wanted pasteurized milk.
That's what the old school said.
And we did the California mastitis milk test and so on.
Now you're talking big production medicine, you're talking
from the farm to the table types of programs which we did we knew we were part of as veterinarians but we never thought of it even as small animal practitioners we didn't we didn't have a role in food safety and we do now we do now now early in your clinical experience here the prime you said it was more dogs than cats and they were from what kind of a region
They were very much local.
They lived in the backyard.
The cats were in and out.
They may come in to eat, but they spent most of their time outside.
And they had names like Spot and Tippy and Fido and Fluffy, but they weren't, it wasn't Susie and Janie and King and Rachel, and it wasn't the humanized names that we often see now.
The cats didn't come in much, maybe for shots.
But we just came into understanding a little bit about heartworm disease.
That was relatively new, although it certainly existed.
And I remember learning about it as a student.
Heartworm preventatives came about treating heartworms.
Spending $200 on a dog was just absolutely outrageous.
broken legs, if you can fix it, simply maybe.
But many times it was euthanasia.
Now, money is still an issue.
We still deal with economics much more so than our physician colleagues have to.
Insurance, third-party paying, is very different than it is in human medicine.
I've watched insurance rise
Probably about three times in cycles.
We're coming into a new cycle of it.
It's a different approach than has been used before.
And this one stands a chance, perhaps.
So it's interesting to watch outside influences on the economics that drive our profession.
Describe some of the unusual animals that you've seen over the years.
The most unusual was the elephant Mai Tai, and that was as a student.
Do you have any idea how to spell Mai Tai?
No, it's like the drink.
I'm sorry, I can't help you.
And when I was a student, Mai Tai had swallowed a rock.
This is in Minnesota?
In Minnesota.
And the rock got stuck in her throat about this far down.
I had to put my, they saw a long skinny arm coming and they said, get over here.
And we were not able to successfully get the rock out of the elephant, unfortunately.
And that was one of my first experiences, really understanding compassion with the animal, the human-animal bond as it has now come to be known.
Over time, I don't have any single individual animal that stands out.
But there must have been some unusual animals.
I was just wondering what variety.
Well, we saw, we were primarily limited to the dogs and cats.
And so, oh, we'd hear about an elephant that was over there or a llama that was over in, usually they were stuck in a large animal cage or, you know, the exotic animals that would come in.
There would be a lion, we'd have to go see that.
One of the big tortoises, we'd go see that.
an ostrich that would come in before they became popular.
So the exotic animals to go and see them because people weren't doing that very much unless you kind of got forced into it.
The more interesting things would be
a dog or cat that would be brought in more for a particular behavior problem or something that was unusual and the owners would be so embarrassed to talk about.
And how do you bring them out and talk about it?
And to watch the students' faces.
Can you give some examples?
It's hard to.
I was trying to think of, well, probably the most embarrassing from student and owner perspective would be a dog that would swallow a tampon and then
It would be vomiting, but how do we get it up?
Is it going to pass?
Is it not going to pass?
Well, yes.
OK, let's make it vomit and get it to pass.
And how to keep a straight face when owners would come in and they'd talk about their dog doing it all over the house.
Well, what do you mean doing it?
Well, what they meant was it was defecating all over the house, but they couldn't use the word until you gave them permission by saying it's OK.
You mean defecating?
Oh, yes, defecating all over the house.
So they'd be so embarrassed to talk about, particularly men.
Or the dog that would be mounting the owner's leg and
They didn't have the words to describe what was going on.
And the students are trying to hold back laughter because this is really serious to the owner.
And there'd be some times you'd go out of the exam room and you'd have to go to the farthest quiet room in the building because you knew you were going to just break out laughing because it really was a funny story when you put it in the total context.
But it was very important to the owner.
Now, correct me if I'm wrong, all of this effort in the clinic was done in the setting as a teaching experience for the students.
Absolutely.
Students are very, very important.
But this was not primarily to serve the public and to cure their animal.
It was that plus this other.
They were equal.
It was always an equal thing.
We have had clients that will come in and say,
I want to see the doctor, I don't want a resident or intern, and I don't want students.
And we kindly explained to them, either you have the students or you are welcome to leave because the students are A&M.
Does anyone ever leave?
We have never had anyone that I can remember leave.
I've never heard of it.
After a while they kind of settle down and they find out, you know, it's really kind of fun to have the students around.
Now surely there must have been some goofy requests that some pet owner has made.
The one that tore me apart potentially the most, we had a lady that had come in and she brought in a dog that had
a serious skin problem.
The whole skin was affected and we weren't sure what it was.
We had some ideas when she came in.
But this was a dog she had found on the side of the road and it was a
Not a young puppy, but not a mature dog in between.
And she, when we diagnosed, she wanted it worked up and the skin problem turned out to be demodex mange.
And we talked to her about treatment and she decided because of the cost of it and because of the difficulty in doing it, she chose to euthanize the dog.
And that wasn't necessarily a wrong decision.
Within a week, she had come in with a second dog, which she had also found on the side of the road.
And this dog had a tumor.
That's what she thought it was.
There was a bump over the hip.
Well, in feeling it, it became quite obvious that this wasn't a tumor.
There was a bone under there.
And this dog had a fractured leg.
She was going to take this dog home
and just leave the leg, not fix it.
And here's where the humaneness comes in again.
I can't let this lady walk out this door with this dog, obviously in pain, broken leg.
So we started scrambling to see.
And the irony was
The lady had diamonds that were huge as baseballs.
She was driving a brand new Cadillac Mercedes, some big kind of car.
But she said, my husband won't let me spend the money.
So we had to work.
And we were fortunate.
We were able to find some funds, were able to get the animal fixed properly.
She was humane with one dog.
but was going to let another one go around with a broken leg.
So we were able to get it fixed, and it was one of those feel goods.
We were able to do the right thing for the animal for the right reasons.
Now, surely there must have been some truly goofy request by some owner.
Can you do this?
Can you change that?
There are a lot of owners that will come in with totally unrealistic diagnoses.
They have already decided what it is.
There's no way you're going to change their mind.
And I'm trying to think of specific ones, and I can't.
The lump I guess, they come in, the concern, well I can't think of the funny ones.
I can think of the ones that jerk your heart strings.
Well what are some of those?
Well the dog that comes in,
It's not uncommon to see a dog come in for a yearly exam.
And what we notice are the lymph nodes that are superficial are huge.
They're just huge.
And that almost is a pathognomonic for tumor lymphoma.
The dog's dying, and it won't be long.
But the dog doesn't feel bad.
The owner has not seen this.
And we pointed out on the exam, and this is one of these situations where you have to be real careful and say, you can't say, oh, you brought it in healthy, but it's dying.
So you've got to take your samples and you say, well, we're going to send them off to the pathologist to buy a couple of days' time for them to think about it, point out these huge baseball-sized lymph nodes, and say, you know, one of the bad things it could be would be cancer, so that they can start thinking about what ultimately may happen.
And many of them choose not to treat for several reasons, but they may treat with, we can use the steroids, the cortisones.
to help shrink them, make them feel a little bit better.
But many of those are dying and are euthanized within a couple of weeks of our finding it.
So they bring in a healthy dog, and within a few weeks we've got a dead animal.
And surely you all must have had some experience of treating the pet of some high-profile people.
Yeah, the most high profile that I personally was involved with was Lyle Leavitt, had a cab.
I didn't know who Lyle Leavitt was.
Everyone was, oh, Lyle Leavitt's coming in, Lyle Leavitt's coming in.
Okay, that's nice, whoever that is.
Oh, he's a country western singer.
Okay, I'll take your word for it.
And he came in, and of course, the first impression is, here's this funny hairdo.
So it was a cat that had a nerve paralysis on the leg, had been there quite a while, and it was the type of thing you recommend amputation, and cats could care less.
And so to confirm the diagnosis and so on.
So I'm in working with Lyle Leavitt, and everybody's, you know, the window has 1,000 faces plastered to it, and all the students in there are falling all over themselves because they're working with Lyle Leavitt, and it's like,
OK, so go on and do my thing.
Don't you know who he is?
No.
Subsequently, I've learned who Lyle Leavitt is.
That's one of several.
What was he like as a pet owner?
He's a very nice person.
He's just a normal human being like all of us are.
And that's one thing that I've
I have never been enamored by celebrities, because usually I find out they're normal people like everybody else, and there's no reason to go goo-goo-ga-ga over them.
I've always appreciated them for the people that they are.
Now, surely there must have been university presidents, pets, regents?
Well, Reveille is the one that we deal with the most.
Oh.
Reveille.
Share some Reveille stories.
The Reveille stories that I remember, I don't know, it must be five, was brought in one time because of vomiting.
And Dr. Hall wasn't there, so Dr. Beaver got to see Reveille.
Well, okay.
As it turns out, it was probably a good thing Dr. Beaver did see Reveille because Reveille got stressed very easily.
You could always tell when it was the first football season, or the first game of the season, or the first time that she was really back on campus with thousands of people around her, because she would get stressed and she would start vomiting.
Plus the fact probably a lot of people were feeding her things she didn't need to have fed.
So OK, let's just do the.
don't feed her for a while, and just kind of the standard protocol on one that is a little stressed, back off, give her a chance, let her be alone for a while, just to give her some calm time.
Any governor, senator, wealthy person?
Not that I have dealt with specific.
Well, I'm sure that they have, but I haven't known who they were.
I know someone called from the state veterinary office saying that Senator so-and-so was sending a dog or a cat over, you know, treat them with VIP gloves.
And I can remember talking to the veterinarian who was actually going to be seeing the case, and it was George Lees in that one situation.
George said, we treat them all like VIPs.
Why should I be any different?
And he's absolutely right.
It doesn't matter.
Describe for me again, naive, what are the staffing of the clinic?
What kind of shifts do you work?
How many people are there?
How long?
How many days a week?
The staffing has evolved in the clinic considerably in the time that I've been here.
What was it like when compared then and now?
Well, then there were no technicians, so the clinician had
depending on four to six students usually, sometimes maybe even more than that because there weren't a lot of clinicians.
If you did medicine, you did medicine.
It didn't matter what kind of medicine, everything that walked in the door.
If you did surgery, you either got the referrals for surgery or medicine people sent you the surgery cases.
We did have, Ned Elliott was doing ophthalmology, so that was kind of the one thing that was a little separate.
But he did a lot of the medicine, too.
Gene Gowing was here, and what a master of the art of veterinary medicine.
And I can always remember, we would page overhead when a clinician had a phone call.
And Gene, because he couldn't hear as well, they called him doctor number 13.
He could understand that one, but he couldn't hear gowing as well.
Now we have each service has technicians, and we have seven medicine services and five
I believe it is, surgery services.
So it has expanded horrendously over that time with technical support for all of them, plus a few other technicians in various areas.
We also have the exotic animal services, which take care of the critters that nobody knows anything about except them.
Now, when we have to draw blood, we can have the technician help the student learn.
We're buried in paperwork, so the clinician can spend the time getting the paperwork done, making sure that the right protocols are down.
With the litigiousness of society today, we have to be more careful in paperwork than we were back then.
So the paperwork has grown something fierce.
Now, when you first began as a clinician, what was the assignment?
How many hours per week?
And was it an eight-hour shift?
Well, in theory, we're here from 8 to 5.
Now, that's in theory.
Once you're on the clinic floor, you're here probably from 8 till whenever.
And that has always been true.
The time factor has never changed.
You often were assigned early on.
You did emergencies.
a resident covering the emergency that came in or they would call a clinician that was appropriate for whatever kind of emergency it was in, was.
We didn't have, we had students that manned the intensive care area 24 hours, well no, when they were not on the clinic floor, they did the nighttime shifts in ICU.
That was one of the first areas that we brought technicians into so that we would have 24 hours coverage of technicians in ICU.
Then we started getting technicians for the various services.
We always had one or two that kind of covered the what we call community practice area, the outpatient area, which is kind of the local area.
But initially, various clinicians would rotate through.
So Mike Willard, who was really into GI stuff,
was covering and receiving local cases that might be skin or they might be a neuro case or whatever.
He was doing all.
But at other times, he might do that two days a week or two afternoons a week.
But all his emergency and important GI cases were not being covered while he was covering the local ones.
So we switched.
back probably around 1990 so that we had specific services and they saw specific types of cases and the local ones went into the community service and that's where I ended up doing kind of the local receiving which made a lot of sense because all the new puppies and kittens came in there for their vaccines too so we could talk to them about
how to grow a good citizen, starting from the time they're a young puppy or a kitten.
Now, you as a professional were then supervising a number of students on that shift.
That's right.
And in the early years it might have been how many?
we are well we usually would have five or six and now five or six oh still yeah and they what year seniors fourth year fourth fourth year all right so that they are comparatively well prepared they're book prepared they're not hands-on prepared and that's the fun of watching them develop
their confidence, not that they have a lot by the time they graduate, but being able to change from the organization they use to remember their book knowledge into the organizational skills they were going to need to think, well, you know, what are the differentials for a vomiting dog?
What are the differentials for this kind of, you know, an itchy skin disease?
to kind of watch them and make them go through this process of reorganizing their thought processes and actually draw on this knowledge and not have to put it down in a multiple choice test, but on the multiple choice everyday type of test that they've got.
Can you remember any, I know you won't believe it, sort of examples of a diagnosis by a student that was way, way, way off the mark?
I was going to say most of them are off the mark, but they're not.
Yes, there are a number of them that will come in particularly early in the year.
And they go through a history, and there's kind of a set history form.
It doesn't say ask this question, this question, this question.
But you ask about what is the chief complaint?
What is the history of that complaint?
Problems have they noticed?
What surgeries have they had?
What medicines are they on?
And then you've got a systems review.
Are they coughing, sneezing, vomiting?
And you just ask general questions.
Well, as early in their senior year, they come in and they go through this list.
And they find out the dog is here for vaccinations.
And they go through any vomiting, diarrhea.
Yeah, the dog's been vomiting for the last, you know,
Three days.
It's been a little depressed, yes.
So they come out and they tell us, they're here to vaccinate the dog, so we need to vaccinate him with this and then they come back in three weeks and they get this and then they'll come back in another three weeks and get the third shot.
And it's like, does the fact that they're vomiting have anything to do, could that mean that we might not want to vaccinate him?
Oh, I don't know.
How long have they been vomiting?
Well, I didn't ask that.
Well, what does the vomitous look like?
I have no idea.
The fact that the animal comes in and they have parvo disease and shouldn't even be near a vaccine, they totally miss it.
And it's like, what do you mean the dog's been vomiting for three days and you've just walked out through the hospital without
you know, sanitizing your feet.
Oh, could that be important?
Maybe so.
Let's see.
As we've gone from an overwhelmingly male to now a female majority in the enrollment, how has that changed the operations of the clinic and the real world of the veterinary school as you see it?
As we've gone, as the number of women have increased, there's actually been a change in the profession overall from going to, from the good old boy stories and mentality to the understanding the science and the depth of the discipline.
It's really been a good thing for veterinary medicine.
While it isn't that the dirty jokes have dried up, that's part of it, and that's been a result, and that's been okay.
But the whole profession, and this may in part be timing rather than gender change, but I think a lot of the women that have come in have been extremely bright,
They realize that when they get out, they often are going to be combining career and family life.
They're not going to have a lot of time.
And so they need to be very organized and disciplined in how they approach it.
And I think it has changed how we approach the profession as a whole.
It's definitely been for the better.
Now, that said, if we look at what happens when they get out, there is truly a concern, which was pointed out in a big study recently published by the American Veterinary Medical Association, which has pointed to the fact the attitude has changed.
Women probably are viewed as more compassionate.
That's not good or bad.
That's just the way it is.
But as a result of that,
the economics of the profession have not kept pace with the economics of comparable professions.
And that probably has to do with, well, I won't charge you for that, or well, I won't charge you so much with it.
We as veterinarians need to get out of the charging business.
That's what office managers can do.
Let me check off what I did on the sheet, let that go into some computer somewhere else.
So I'm divorced from that decision.
That's coming, but we've got a long way to go there.
Now, I'm assuming that compared to 30 years ago, the students today who come into veterinary medicine have higher academic grade point ratios
a deeper, broader, undergraduate program and that they are more urban, they're more urban percentage-wise kids growing up more in the towns and cities than 30 years ago.
That's true.
The students we see reflect changes in society overall.
It's interesting because many of the graduates of today are not interested in the 60 and 80 hour work weeks anymore.
They want an eight to five type of job, five days a week.
Their background is different, therefore,
Just like the clients they serve, they often don't recognize what's normal for dogs and cats and horses and cows, anything else, because they weren't raised around them.
They didn't see lots of them in a non-humanistic perspective.
So animal behavior, which is my discipline, has really grown because they don't know what normal is.
just like the clients they serve.
Conversely, they tend to want to go back to the cities.
They tend not to want to work with large animal, food animal particularly.
They may have a horse background.
They may not have the cattle, swine, poultry, or certainly something like aquaculture, which is really foreign to a lot of them.
That background isn't there.
They reflect society.
They are
Better educated in breadth, but not necessarily in depth.
They are very bright.
There's no way I could even begin to compete with the student of today.
But when they get out, the hands-on, the adaption to the real world,
Those struggles are no different for the new graduate today than they were 30 years ago.
It's a different profession, but the struggles are still the same.
This is an editorial note I remember as dean of faculties in the 70s getting involved on the fringes of a potential lawsuit.
A young lady with an almost perfect 4.0 GPA from UT Austin in biochemistry.